AWS EC2 Security Hardening Guide

Task 5.1: Check the OS Users

	Step 1: Check Recent Logins

Run the following command to see who has recently logged into the system:

	sudo aureport --auth

sudo: Runs the command with superuser privileges.
aureport --auth: Displays authentication logs.

	Step 2: Check Currently Logged-in Users

	who

Displays a list of currently logged-in users.

	Step 3: Attempt to Remove the Unauthorized User

	sudo userdel -r chaos-user

userdel: Deletes the user.
-r: Removes the user’s home directory and mail.

If the user is logged in, the command will fail and return a process ID (PID).

	Step 4: Kill the Process (Force Logout)

	sudo kill -9 ProcNum

kill -9: Forcefully terminates the process.
ProcNum: Replace this with the actual PID from the previous step.

	Step 5: Verify the Unauthorized User is Gone

	who

The chaos-user should no longer appear in the output.

	Step 6: Delete the User Again

	sudo userdel -r chaos-user

Now, this command should succeed.

	Step 7: Verify No Other Suspicious OS Users

	sudo cat /etc/passwd | grep -v nologin

cat /etc/passwd: Displays system users.
grep -v nologin: Filters out service accounts that cannot log in.

Standard users like root, sync, shutdown, and halt should remain.


Task 5.2: Update SSH Security

	Step 1: Check the SSH Configuration File

	sudo ls -l /etc/ssh/sshd_config

Lists the file details, including its last modified date.

	Step 2: Edit the SSH Configuration File

	sudo vi /etc/ssh/sshd_config

Opens the file in the vi editor.

	Step 3: Enable Line Numbering in vi

	:set number

Displays line numbers for easier navigation.

	Step 4: Disable Password Authentication
Locate: PasswordAuthentication yes
Press a to enter edit mode and change it to: #PasswordAuthentication yes

	Step 5: Enable Key-Based Authentication
Locate: #PasswordAuthentication no
Remove the # to uncomment it: PasswordAuthentication no

This ensures only SSH key-based logins are allowed.

	Step 6: Save Changes and Exit vi

	:wq

	Step 7: Restart the SSH Service

	sudo service sshd restart

Restarts the SSH daemon to apply the new security settings.

Summary

✅ Removed an unauthorized user from the system.
✅ Investigated their access method.
✅ Secured SSH by disabling password authentication.
✅ Restarted the SSH service to enforce security changes.

This guide ensures better security practices for your EC2 instance. 🚀